24 Hours of Hell

"Andrew, there's a climb open over here. Let's go."  
I squinted through the darkness, wistfully pulling my La Sportiva Mythos back on my poor feet. It seemed like the hardest part of this competition was standing up for so damn long. I got up, snapped the locker to my belay loop, and within seconds was ready to climb. "Let's do it."

This past September my friend Jamie asked me to compete in the famed 24 Hours of Horseshoe Hell with him. It came as a text out of the blue:  
J: Yo! What're you doing 25-30 sept?
A: Was planning on working, but what's up?

I was kinda hoping he'd give me an excuse to ditch work and show him around the New. But then:
J: Mado can't make it to 24 hours of hourse hell anymore so I'm in need of a new partner

Oh shit.
A: Oh shit
A: Now that I could be interested in

There's a certain legend surrounding Horseshoe Hell. Just the name connotates badassery, and then you have the big names trying their hands. Alex Honnold. Tommy Caldwell. Sonnie Trotter. That, and the fact there's a freaking lottery system to enter, already won for me by the way, sealed the fact that I was not about to turn this down.

I later learned that Jamie's ultimate goal in hitting me up was he needed someone strong to requalify, and to requalify each team member must do at least 115 routes. I was skeptical. I probably average 4 or 5 climbs a day at the New, and now we're going for 10 an hour? But I wasn't going to let him down without trying, so I got to training.

This was the most interesting part to me: how does one train for twenty-four hours of moderate climbing?
My first thought was to train as if for a running marathon. Big days in the gym. Bigger days after that. Until you get to 24 hours. But given my schedule, lack of willing partner, and the fact I couldn't stay inside from the New for a single weekend, ruined thos plans.

So I looked online. I found some good resources here https://www.uphillathlete.com/training-24-horseshoe-hell/, here http://www.dowerspower.com/training, and here http://horseshoehellbeta.com/w/index.php?title=Main_Page. (The second is by a 70 year old dude still crushing the comp. Inspiration!). Ok, it seems like this thing should be approached like a long hike. Build up the aerobic capacity. Do more "work". I had a pretty decent base built beforehand, having a routine of going to the gym in the morning and climbing at night. But I needed the endurance.

So I started to do some morning sessions on a thing called the Jacob's Ladder in the Capital One gym. Basically a 45 degree treadmill ladder. At first, 10 minutes on the thing kicked my butt. Then I moved up to 15, then 30, and finally, my goal of an hour. Additionally, I did a few ARC sessions going around the circuit board for up to an hour at a time. Interestingly, I did not feel as "strong" as I did doing my normal routine, but I knew I had to trust in the process and a change was probably good for me.

So come trip weekend. I meet Jamie at the Fayetteville airport. We hit up one of the zillion Walmarts in Arkansas and buy supplies. Oatmeal. Red Bull. Gatorade. I read that for food, people worked best with happy, happy carbs. So we picked up a giant bag of Hippies and Doritos, for good measure.  

We set up camp and sleep. The next day, we make oatmeal and check out the event. There's a home base of sponsor tents and people milling about, but honestly I was a bit underwhelmed. I was kinda expecting like, a city of dirtbags and their accompanying stench.

We participate in the Mane Event. This was a new addition to the festivities - we didn't know what it entailed but were told it's "half scavenger hunt, half adventure race". Sure, why not.

The next two hours are filled running to the furthest reaches of the canyon, completing challenges at each site. My partner John and I spelunked through an indoor maze, walked a via ferrata course, got attacked by some masked guys with noodles, picked up goat shit, and massaged the 12 hour competitors. It was actually an awesome time meeting new people, and a good way to familiarize myself with the canyon to boot.

We hung out the rest of the day, watching people get tattoos, getting wild haircuts, checking out sponsor booths, eating pizza. There was a hot dog roast which we missed and a movie at night. It was a really good time.

We also stashed our supplies across the canyon. Our (last minute) plan was to start at the Titanic Boulder, hop over to Doomsday Wall, and spend the rest of our time at North 40. I split my food into three, leaving some at Titanic, some at the left side of North 40, and most at the right, by Crimp Scampi. Jamie left almost all his stuff at Crimp and carried some in his backpack to start. 

I stared. "You sure?"
"I usually eat like. A single bar when I go climbing. I don't need much"
ok. whatever.

Game Day.

Wake up. Take a shit. Honestly, biggest worry of the trip.

We gather. There're people wearing astronaut suits. 70's rock fishnets. cams on their heads. I look down. We (lamely) opted out on a costume, but I'm hoping we make up for it in performance. The time comes. Andy Chasteen comes out in what looks like something a cult leader would wear (fitting, I remind myself) and takes roll call. Each team has a chant. We yell "SAVE THE SHIRE!". I make mental note to plan better next time. Then Gordo the Great comes out. The psyche is palpable.

"FACE YOUR PARTNER AND LOOK INTO THEIR SOUL!"
I face Jamie and look into his soul.
"RAISE YOUR RIGHT HAND"
I do.
"AND REPEAT AFTER ME!"

What follows is our lives being signed away in the forthcoming blood, sweat, and tears. I don't remember the pledge but I believe I was called a fool and a lion. A lion in a field of lions.

The shotgun blasts.

We run.

We reach Titanic Boulder, and despite being one of the first ones there, blindly start on one of the hardest routes of the day: Skid Mark, 10b.

We climb quickly. I go up. Lower. Up again. Lower. He goes up. Lower. Up again. Clean. This goes on.

There is alot a waiting. You can't help that.

The routes flash by. What is this route? Don't know. How many laps do you have left? Ok, next one. Every hour, on the hour, hoops and hollers echo across the canyon. It becomes a trance. Soon, we had climbed out the crag and moved onto the Doomsday Wall. We do the same there, and move on to North 40. 

It's about 6 hours in when I'm belaying Jamie on some 5.9 in the Cooridor area. I'm emjoying my time off the wall, chilling when I hear above me:

"ARGHHH!!!"

I rip up slack, unsure what else to do. I look up. Jamie is frozen on the wall, staring at his left forearm.

"What's up?" I ask. "I'm cramping up." A couple guys around me smile sympathetically. "I can't even clip."

He somehow makes it to the top and I lower him down. He can't even raise his water bottle to his lips. "How terrifying." He says. I agree. But then I remember who was the dumbass who thought he could eat a bar the entire day.

We take a break. The cramps come on and off again, and I give him the sugar water from my stash. I can tell he's frustrated with himself, and I try to be a supportive partner. To be honest, I'm glad to just chill. Then we keep going, but slower.

Night comes.

We are in the Crimp Scampi area when we reach for our headlamps. There are lots of people here, which we planned for, to keep the psyche up. The music and hollers still resound across the walls, between people asking people how many laps they have left. I get a bit annoyed at how pushy Jamie is, but I guess that's what you gotta do to win. 

All this time, I'm feeling good. I'm hydrating practically every route and pissing every other. I down 2 breakfast burritos, half a pizza, and every apple I can make time for. The only thing I didn't account for was my legs from standing for this many hours. I vaguely wonder how I can train for this nuisance.

Crimp Scampi area. Check. Kindergarden boulder. Check. Groovy area.

The sun rises.

I've heard from veterans that the sun would give me a jolt of energy. I wasn't expecting this. It warms me up, fills me, and suddenly I'm more psyched than ever to finish strong. We renew our pace, feeling like we just started the comp.

We reach the 115 mark at 6:30am on a route called Brand New. A yell, a whoop. Double high fives. Smiles. 

Now I'm having fun. We chill for a while, take a much needed shit. I want to get back on the wall. I want to keep going.  

Jamie's broken but he agrees to belay me. I continue to climb, with him now going between my goes in case he can't make it up. We go much slower, but it's better than nothing.  

We finish early with 123 routes each. I'm damn proud; that's way more than I was expecting, and I know I could do more. Maybe next year.  

We clean up our stashes, submit our scores, stumble into our tents. Nap time.

Awards ceremony. I get to go through the slip-n-slide for getting 3rd in the Mane Event!

After party. Great concert then rave. Marred slightly by someone jumping on my toe. I leave and go to bed.

The next morning, we eat breakfast and head out. I wasn't expecting to miss the event, but I find myself reviewing what I could do better. Maybe next year...



--
In review, it was a damn good time and I'm 100% glad to have done it. Not the cheapest, but hell, I feel like I participated in a rite of passage and I'm proud of my performance.

For next year:
I'm surprised how well my body, especially my skin, kept up. I'm most proud of how well I hydrated and stashed. I think for next year I would stash less at my beginning point (a whole jug and some were left behind) and more electrolyte water middle/end. We probably didn't need as many gallons as we did, but if it weren't for the electrolyte water provided, we would've ran out. I would've stashed more "real" food (the breakfast burritos were amazing) and less chips. Though I'd say for my first time, I was never in a state of low supplies.

For preparation, I think I did pretty well. Climbing outside alot toughened my skin, and being used to working hard through gym/climbing days paid off. I do think the aerobic stuff at the end helped, and are probably not needed earlier. If I were to have a different plan of attack I think I would start at Titanic and Doomsday, and then go straight to The Land Beyond on the right side of North 40. There was more resting from waiting in lines than I thought, so I would do more 10+s and skip routes that have a wait time of more than a lap or so. Go left on North 40 and come back right to pick up the ones undone. 

And finally, I think next time I will definitely bring a costume.


